---
title: Improve the CodeWorld environment for Haskell in K-12 education
---

[CodeWorld](http://code.world) is a web-based tool designed to support Haskell in K-12 education, as well as provide a low-overhead playground for trying things in Haskell in general.  There are several promising projects here for a student interested in promoting functional programming in education.

* A project for an *advanced* student would be to build tools to inspect any expression in a Haskell module.  Some brainstorming on this project is already available in [CodeWorld Issue #741](https://github.com/google/codeworld/issues/741).  A promising approach is to create a Haskell source plugin which adds new module exports for each expression in a module, and generates a source map linking them to the original expression in the source code.  These two things would support a UI for a programmer to select an expression and inspect its value.  Although the output UI implementation may be specific to CodeWorld or another editor, the source plugin and a library of supporting code would be reusable by many tools.
* A project for an *intermediate* student would be to build an interface for designed activities.  Some reflections on this are available in [CodeWorld Issue #793](https://github.com/google/codeworld/issues/793).  Although CodeWorld is designed to be a general-purpose tool to create whatever you like, in practice many educators would like to assign specific activities, and have the environment guide their students through them.  The environment could do things like make certain parts of the code uneditable or hidden, check answers and proceed to a next exercise in a sequence when complete, keep track of points (or "stars" as many casual games do) as students progress, and simplify the normal CodeWorld UI so that an exercise can be embedded into an iframe without the project saving UI and things like that.
* A project for an *intermediate* or *advanced* student, is to implement more features for requirements checking.  Some steps on this are available in the [related CodeWorld project on GitHub](https://github.com/google/codeworld/projects/9).  CodeWorld already has an experimental system for instructors to define a set of requirements for the source code of a project, such as containing certain source constructs, functions using all of their parameters, etc.  There's plenty of room to both extend the set of rule types this system knows about, and experiment with sample projects to prove its usefulness.  An ambitious student could consider proposals to change the implementation so that the system also allows for runtime testing.
* A project for an *intermediate* student is to expand the usefulness of CodeWorld for the mainstream Haskell ecosystem.  Some ideas here are collected in the [relevant CodeWorld project on GitHub](https://github.com/google/codeworld/projects/8).  Although the page at https://code.world implements a simplified variant of Haskell for teaching children, the CodeWorld project also provides https://code.world/haskell, which is a more vanilla Haskell environment.  However, this "Haskell mode" environment could be made more useful in a few ways.  Adapters for well-known Haskell libraries like Gloss or Diagrams or Reflex or others would be one project.  More ambitious is to extend the I/O implementation to implement reading from an stdin stream implemented in the browser.  A strong proposal for this would include a vision of what features would be useful to the Haskell community.
* A project for a Haskell *beginner* might include improving various aspects of the user interface for the CodeWorld environment.  This could include better browsing or rendering of error messages, auto-save for student projects, bookmark for browsing the guide, improvements to the debug and inspect controls for running programs, continuous error highlighting, etc.  Many of these features are most easily implemented in JavaScript, so a strong proposal here could come from a student who knows JavaScript well, but wants to contribute to the Haskell ecosystem.  There are many ideas for small improvements [in the CodeWorld issue tracker](https://github.com/google/codeworld/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aenhancement+-label%3Afunblocks).

**Potential Mentors**: Chris Smith

**Difficulty**: Varies (see specific ideas above)
